Project Gutenberg's The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge, by Arthur Conan Doyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Posting Date: October 23, 2008 [EBook #2343]
Release Date: October, 2000
[Last updated: December 8, 2011]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURE OF WISTERIA LODGE ***




Produced by David Brannan









The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge


by

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle




CONTENTS

  1. The Singular Experience of Mr. John Scott Eccles
  2. The Tiger of San Pedro




1.  The Singular Experience of Mr. John Scott Eccles



I find it recorded in my notebook that it was a bleak and windy day
towards the end of March in the year 1892.  Holmes had received a
telegram while we sat at our lunch, and he had scribbled a reply.  He
made no remark, but the matter remained in his thoughts, for he stood
in front of the fire afterwards with a thoughtful face, smoking his
pipe, and casting an occasional glance at the message.  Suddenly he
turned upon me with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes.

"I suppose, Watson, we must look upon you as a man of letters," said
he.  "How do you define the word 'grotesque'?"

"Strange--remarkable," I suggested.

He shook his head at my definition.

"There is surely something more than that," said he; "some underlying
suggestion of the tragic and the terrible.  If you cast your mind back
to some of those narratives with which you have afflicted a
long-suffering public, you will recognize how often the grotesque has
deepened into the criminal.  Think of that little affair of the
red-headed men.  That was grotesque enough in the outset, and yet it
ended in a desperate attempt at robbery.  Or, again, there was that
most grotesque affair of the five orange pips, which led straight to a
murderous conspiracy. The word puts me on the alert."

"Have you it there?" I asked.

He read the telegram aloud.

"Have just had most incredible and grotesque experience.  May I consult
you?

"Scott Eccles,
  "Post Office, Charing Cross."


"Man or woman?" I asked.

"Oh, man, of course. No woman would ever send a reply-paid telegram.
She would have come."

"Will you see him?"

"My dear Watson, you know how bored I have been since we locked up
Colonel Carruthers.  My mind is like a racing engine, tearing itself to
pieces because it is not connected up with the work for which it was
built.  Life is commonplace, the papers are sterile; audacity and
romance seem to have passed forever from the criminal world.  Can you
ask me, then, whether I am ready to look into any new problem, however
trivial it may prove?  But here, unless I am mistaken, is our client."

A measured step was heard upon the stairs, and a moment later a stout,
tall, gray-whiskered and solemnly respectable person was ushered into
the room.  His life history was written in his heavy features and
pompous manner.  From his spats to his gold-rimmed spectacles he was a
Conservative, a churchman, a good citizen, orthodox and conventional to
the last degree. But some amazing experience had disturbed his native
composure and left its traces in his bristling hair, his flushed, angry
cheeks, and his flurried, excited manner. He plunged instantly into his
business.

"I have had a most singular and unpleasant experience, Mr. Holmes,"
said he.  "Never in my life have I been placed in such a situation.  It
is most improper--most outrageous.  I must insist upon some
explanation."  He swelled and puffed in his anger.

"Pray sit down, Mr. Scott Eccles," said Holmes in a soothing voice.
"May I ask, in the first place, why you came to me at all?"

"Well, sir, it did not appear to be a matter which concerned the
police, and yet, when you have heard the facts, you must admit that I
could not leave it where it was.  Private detectives are a class with
whom I have absolutely no sympathy, but none the less, having heard
your name--"

"Quite so.  But, in the second place, why did you not come at once?"

Holmes glanced at his watch.

"It is a quarter-past two," he said.  "Your telegram was dispatched
about one.  But no one can glance at your toilet and attire without
seeing that your disturbance dates from the moment of your waking."

Our client smoothed down his unbrushed hair and felt his unshaven chin.

"You are right, Mr. Holmes.  I never gave a thought to my toilet. I was
only too glad to get out of such a house.  But I have been running
round making inquiries before I came to you.  I went to the house
agents, you know, and they said that Mr. Garcia's rent was paid up all
right and that everything was in order at Wisteria Lodge."

"Come, come, sir," said Holmes, laughing.  "You are like my friend, Dr.
Watson, who has a bad habit of telling his stories wrong end foremost.
Please arrange your thoughts and let me know, in their due sequence,
exactly what those events are which have sent you out unbrushed and
unkempt, with dress boots and waistcoat buttoned awry, in search of
advice and assistance."

Our client looked down with a rueful face at his own unconventional
appearance.

"I'm sure it must look very bad, Mr. Holmes, and I am not aware that in
my whole life such a thing has ever happened before.  But I will tell you
the whole queer business, and when I have done so you will admit, I am
sure, that there has been enough to excuse me."

But his narrative was nipped in the bud.  There was a bustle outside,
and Mrs. Hudson opened the door to usher in two robust and
official-looking individuals, one of whom was well known to us as
Inspector Gregson of Scotland Yard, an energetic, gallant, and, within
his limitations, a capable officer.  He shook hands with Holmes and
introduced his comrade as Inspector Baynes, of the Surrey Constabulary.

"We are hunting together, Mr. Holmes, and our trail lay in this
direction."  He turned his bulldog eyes upon our visitor.  "Are you Mr.
John Scott Eccles, of Popham House, Lee?"

"I am."

"We have been following you about all the morning."

"You traced him through the telegram, no doubt," said Holmes.

"Exactly, Mr. Holmes.  We picked up the scent at Charing Cross
Post-Office and came on here."

"But why do you follow me?  What do you want?"

"We wish a statement, Mr. Scott Eccles, as to the events which led up
to the death last night of Mr. Aloysius Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge, near
Esher."

Our client had sat up with staring eyes and every tinge of colour
struck from his astonished face.

"Dead?  Did you say he was dead?"

"Yes, sir, he is dead."

"But how?  An accident?"

"Murder, if ever there was one upon earth."

"Good God!  This is awful!  You don't mean--you don't mean that I am
suspected?"

"A letter of yours was found in the dead man's pocket, and we know by
it that you had planned to pass last night at his house."

"So I did."

"Oh, you did, did you?"

Out came the official notebook.

"Wait a bit, Gregson," said Sherlock Holmes.  "All you desire is a
plain statement, is it not?"

"And it is my duty to warn Mr. Scott Eccles that it may be used against
him."

"Mr. Eccles was going to tell us about it when you entered the room.  I
think, Watson, a brandy and soda would do him no harm. Now, sir, I
suggest that you take no notice of this addition to your audience, and
that you proceed with your narrative exactly as you would have done had
you never been interrupted."

Our visitor had gulped off the brandy and the colour had returned to
his face.  With a dubious glance at the inspector's notebook, he
plunged at once into his extraordinary statement.

"I am a bachelor," said he, "and being of a sociable turn I cultivate a
large number of friends.  Among these are the family of a retired
brewer called Melville, living at Abermarle Mansion, Kensington.  It
was at his table that I met some weeks ago a young fellow named Garcia.
He was, I understood, of Spanish descent and connected in some way with
the embassy.  He spoke perfect English, was pleasing in his manners,
and as good-looking a man as ever I saw in my life.

"In some way we struck up quite a friendship, this young fellow and I.
He seemed to take a fancy to me from the first, and within two days of
our meeting he came to see me at Lee.  One thing led to another, and it
ended in his inviting me out to spend a few days at his house, Wisteria
Lodge, between Esher and Oxshott.  Yesterday evening I went to Esher to
fulfil this engagement.

"He had described his household to me before I went there.  He lived
with a faithful servant, a countryman of his own, who looked after all
his needs.  This fellow could speak English and did his housekeeping
for him.  Then there was a wonderful cook, he said, a half-breed whom
he had picked up in his travels, who could serve an excellent dinner.
I remember that he remarked what a queer household it was to find in
the heart of Surrey, and that I agreed with him, though it has proved a
good deal queerer than I thought.

"I drove to the place--about two miles on the south side of Esher.  The
house was a fair-sized one, standing back from the road, with a curving
drive which was banked with high evergreen shrubs.  It was an old,
tumbledown building in a crazy state of disrepair.  When the trap
pulled up on the grass-grown drive in front of the blotched and
weather-stained door, I had doubts as to my wisdom in visiting a man
whom I knew so slightly.  He opened the door himself, however, and
greeted me with a great show of cordiality.  I was handed over to the
manservant, a melancholy, swarthy individual, who led the way, my bag
in his hand, to my bedroom.  The whole place was depressing.  Our
dinner was tete-a-tete, and though my host did his best to be
entertaining, his thoughts seemed to continually wander, and he talked
so vaguely and wildly that I could hardly understand him. He
continually drummed his fingers on the table, gnawed his nails, and
gave other signs of nervous impatience.  The dinner itself was neither
well served nor well cooked, and the gloomy presence of the taciturn
servant did not help to enliven us.  I can assure you that many times
in the course of the evening I wished that I could invent some excuse
which would take me back to Lee.

"One thing comes back to my memory which may have a bearing upon the
business that you two gentlemen are investigating.  I thought nothing
of it at the time.  Near the end of dinner a note was handed in by the
servant.  I noticed that after my host had read it he seemed even more
distrait and strange than before.  He gave up all pretence at
conversation and sat, smoking endless cigarettes, lost in his own
thoughts, but he made no remark as to the contents.  About eleven I was
glad to go to bed.  Some time later Garcia looked in at my door--the
room was dark at the time--and asked me if I had rung.  I said that I
had not.  He apologized for having disturbed me so late, saying that it
was nearly one o'clock.  I dropped off after this and slept soundly all
night.

"And now I come to the amazing part of my tale.  When I woke it was
broad daylight.  I glanced at my watch, and the time was nearly nine.
I had particularly asked to be called at eight, so I was very much
astonished at this forgetfulness.  I sprang up and rang for the
servant.  There was no response.  I rang again and again, with the same
result.  Then I came to the conclusion that the bell was out of order.
I huddled on my clothes and hurried downstairs in an exceedingly bad
temper to order some hot water.  You can imagine my surprise when I
found that there was no one there.  I shouted in the hall.  There was
no answer.  Then I ran from room to room. All were deserted.  My host
had shown me which was his bedroom the night before, so I knocked at
the door. No reply.  I turned the handle and walked in.  The room was
empty, and the bed had never been slept in.  He had gone with the rest.
The foreign host, the foreign footman, the foreign cook, all had
vanished in the night!  That was the end of my visit to Wisteria Lodge."

Sherlock Holmes was rubbing his hands and chuckling as he added this
bizarre incident to his collection of strange episodes.

"Your experience is, so far as I know, perfectly unique," said he.
"May I ask, sir, what you did then?"

"I was furious.  My first idea was that I had been the victim of some
absurd practical joke.  I packed my things, banged the hall door behind
me, and set off for Esher, with my bag in my hand. I called at Allan
Brothers', the chief land agents in the village, and found that it was
from this firm that the villa had been rented.  It struck me that the
whole proceeding could hardly be for the purpose of making a fool of
me, and that the main object must be to get out of the rent.  It is
late in March, so quarter-day is at hand.  But this theory would not
work.  The agent was obliged to me for my warning, but told me that the
rent had been paid in advance.  Then I made my way to town and called
at the Spanish embassy.  The man was unknown there.  After this I went
to see Melville, at whose house I had first met Garcia, but I found
that he really knew rather less about him than I did. Finally when I
got your reply to my wire I came out to you, since I gather that you
are a person who gives advice in difficult cases.  But now, Mr.
Inspector, I understand, from what you said when you entered the room,
that you can carry the story on, and that some tragedy had occurred. I
can assure you that every word I have said is the truth, and that,
outside of what I have told you, I know absolutely nothing about the
fate of this man.  My only desire is to help the law in every possible
way."

"I am sure of it, Mr. Scott Eccles--I am sure of it," said Inspector
Gregson in a very amiable tone.  "I am bound to say that everything
which you have said agrees very closely with the facts as they have
come to our notice.  For example, there was that note which arrived
during dinner.  Did you chance to observe what became of it?"

"Yes, I did.  Garcia rolled it up and threw it into the fire."

"What do you say to that, Mr. Baynes?"

The country detective was a stout, puffy, red man, whose face was only
redeemed from grossness by two extraordinarily bright eyes, almost
hidden behind the heavy creases of cheek and brow.  With a slow smile
he drew a folded and discoloured scrap of paper from his pocket.

"It was a dog-grate, Mr. Holmes, and he overpitched it.  I picked this
out unburned from the back of it."

Holmes smiled his appreciation.

"You must have examined the house very carefully to find a single
pellet of paper."

"I did, Mr. Holmes.  It's my way.  Shall I read it, Mr. Gregson?"

The Londoner nodded.

"The note is written upon ordinary cream-laid paper without watermark.
It is a quarter-sheet.  The paper is cut off in two snips with a
short-bladed scissors.  It has been folded over three times and sealed
with purple wax, put on hurriedly and pressed down with some flat oval
object.  It is addressed to Mr. Garcia, Wisteria Lodge. It says:

"Our own colours, green and white.  Green open, white shut.  Main
stair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize.  Godspeed.  D.

"It is a woman's writing, done with a sharp-pointed pen, but the
address is either done with another pen or by someone else.  It is
thicker and bolder, as you see."

"A very remarkable note," said Holmes, glancing it over.  "I must
compliment you, Mr. Baynes, upon your attention to detail in your
examination of it.  A few trifling points might perhaps be added. The
oval seal is undoubtedly a plain sleeve-link--what else is of such a
shape?  The scissors were bent nail scissors.  Short as the two snips
are, you can distinctly see the same slight curve in each."

The country detective chuckled.

"I thought I had squeezed all the juice out of it, but I see there was
a little over," he said.  "I'm bound to say that I make nothing of the
note except that there was something on hand, and that a woman, as
usual was at the bottom of it."

Mr. Scott Eccles had fidgeted in his seat during this conversation.

"I am glad you found the note, since it corroborates my story," said
he.  "But I beg to point out that I have not yet heard what has
happened to Mr. Garcia, nor what has become of his household."

"As to Garcia," said Gregson, "that is easily answered.  He was found
dead this morning upon Oxshott Common, nearly a mile from his home.
His head had been smashed to pulp by heavy blows of a sandbag or some
such instrument, which had crushed rather than wounded.  It is a lonely
corner, and there is no house within a quarter of a mile of the spot.
He had apparently been struck down first from behind, but his assailant
had gone on beating him long after he was dead.  It was a most furious
assault.  There are no footsteps nor any clue to the criminals."

"Robbed?"

"No, there was no attempt at robbery."

"This is very painful--very painful and terrible," said Mr. Scott
Eccles in a querulous voice, "but it is really uncommonly hard on me.
I had nothing to do with my host going off upon a nocturnal excursion
and meeting so sad an end.  How do I come to be mixed up with the case?"

"Very simply, sir," Inspector Baynes answered.  "The only document
found in the pocket of the deceased was a letter from you saying that
you would be with him on the night of his death. It was the envelope of
this letter which gave us the dead man's name and address.  It was
after nine this morning when we reached his house and found neither you
nor anyone else inside it.  I wired to Mr. Gregson to run you down in
London while I examined Wisteria Lodge.  Then I came into town, joined
Mr. Gregson, and here we are."

"I think now," said Gregson, rising, "we had best put this matter into
an official shape.  You will come round with us to the station, Mr.
Scott Eccles, and let us have your statement in writing."

"Certainly, I will come at once.  But I retain your services, Mr.
Holmes.  I desire you to spare no expense and no pains to get at the
truth."

My friend turned to the country inspector.

"I suppose that you have no objection to my collaborating with you, Mr.
Baynes?"

"Highly honoured, sir, I am sure."

"You appear to have been very prompt and businesslike in all that you
have done.  Was there any clue, may I ask, as to the exact hour that
the man met his death?"

"He had been there since one o'clock.  There was rain about that time,
and his death had certainly been before the rain."

"But that is perfectly impossible, Mr. Baynes," cried our client. "His
voice is unmistakable.  I could swear to it that it was he who
addressed me in my bedroom at that very hour."

"Remarkable, but by no means impossible," said Holmes, smiling.

"You have a clue?" asked Gregson.

"On the face of it the case is not a very complex one, though it
certainly presents some novel and interesting features.  A further
knowledge of facts is necessary before I would venture to give a final
and definite opinion.  By the way, Mr. Baynes, did you find anything
remarkable besides this note in your examination of the house?"

The detective looked at my friend in a singular way.

"There were," said he, "one or two _very_ remarkable things. Perhaps
when I have finished at the police-station you would care to come out
and give me your opinion of them."

"I am entirely at your service," said Sherlock Holmes, ringing the
bell.  "You will show these gentlemen out, Mrs. Hudson, and kindly send
the boy with this telegram.  He is to pay a five-shilling reply."

We sat for some time in silence after our visitors had left. Holmes
smoked hard, with his browns drawn down over his keen eyes, and his
head thrust forward in the eager way characteristic of the man.

"Well, Watson," he asked, turning suddenly upon me, "what do you make
of it?"

"I can make nothing of this mystification of Scott Eccles."

"But the crime?"

"Well, taken with the disappearance of the man's companions, I should
say that they were in some way concerned in the murder and had fled
from justice."

"That is certainly a possible point of view.  On the face of it you
must admit, however, that it is very strange that his two servants
should have been in a conspiracy against him and should have attacked
him on the one night when he had a guest.  They had him alone at their
mercy every other night in the week."

"Then why did they fly?"

"Quite so.  Why did they fly?  There is a big fact.  Another big fact
is the remarkable experience of our client, Scott Eccles. Now, my dear
Watson, is it beyond the limits of human ingenuity to furnish an
explanation which would cover both of these big facts?  If it were one
which would also admit of the mysterious note with its very curious
phraseology, why, then it would be worth accepting as a temporary
hypothesis.  If the fresh facts which come to our knowledge all fit
themselves into the scheme, then our hypothesis may gradually become a
solution."

"But what is our hypothesis?"

Holmes leaned back in his chair with half-closed eyes.

"You must admit, my dear Watson, that the idea of a joke is impossible.
There were grave events afoot, as the sequel showed, and the coaxing of
Scott Eccles to Wisteria Lodge had some connection with them."

"But what possible connection?"

"Let us take it link by link.  There is, on the face of it, something
unnatural about this strange and sudden friendship between the young
Spaniard and Scott Eccles.  It was the former who forced the pace.  He
called upon Eccles at the other end of London on the very day after he
first met him, and he kept in close touch with him until he got him
down to Esher.  Now, what did he want with Eccles?  What could Eccles
supply?  I see no charm in the man.  He is not particularly
intelligent--not a man likely to be congenial to a quick-witted Latin.
Why, then, was he picked out from all the other people whom Garcia met
as particularly suited to his purpose?  Has he any one outstanding
quality?  I say that he has.  He is the very type of conventional
British respectability, and the very man as a witness to impress
another Briton.  You saw yourself how neither of the inspectors dreamed
of questioning his statement, extraordinary as it was."

"But what was he to witness?"

"Nothing, as things turned out, but everything had they gone another
way.  That is how I read the matter."

"I see, he might have proved an alibi."

"Exactly, my dear Watson; he might have proved an alibi.  We will
suppose, for argument's sake, that the household of Wisteria Lodge are
confederates in some design.  The attempt, whatever it may be, is to
come off, we will say, before one o'clock.  By some juggling of the
clocks it is quite possible that they may have got Scott Eccles to bed
earlier than he thought, but in any case it is likely that when Garcia
went out of his way to tell him that it was one it was really not more
than twelve.  If Garcia could do whatever he had to do and be back by
the hour mentioned he had evidently a powerful reply to any accusation.
Here was this irreproachable Englishman ready to swear in any court of
law that the accused was in the house all the time.  It was an
insurance against the worst."

"Yes, yes, I see that.  But how about the disappearance of the others?"

"I have not all my facts yet, but I do not think there are any
insuperable difficulties.  Still, it is an error to argue in front of
your data.  You find yourself insensibly twisting them round to fit
your theories."

"And the message?"

"How did it run?  'Our own colours, green and white.'  Sounds like
racing.  'Green open, white shut.'  That is clearly a signal.  'Main
stair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize.'  This is an
assignation.  We may find a jealous husband at the bottom of it all.
It was clearly a dangerous quest.  She would not have said 'Godspeed'
had it not been so.  'D'--that should be a guide."

"The man was a Spaniard.  I suggest that 'D' stands for Dolores, a
common female name in Spain."

"Good, Watson, very good--but quite inadmissable.  A Spaniard would
write to a Spaniard in Spanish.  The writer of this note is certainly
English.  Well, we can only possess our soul in patience until this
excellent inspector come back for us. Meanwhile we can thank our lucky
fate which has rescued us for a few short hours from the insufferable
fatigues of idleness."

        *           *           *

An answer had arrived to Holmes's telegram before our Surrey officer
had returned.  Holmes read it and was about to place it in his notebook
when he caught a glimpse of my expectant face. He tossed it across with
a laugh.

"We are moving in exalted circles," said he.

The telegram was a list of names and addresses:

Lord Harringby, The Dingle; Sir George Ffolliott, Oxshott Towers; Mr.
Hynes Hynes, J.P., Purdley Place; Mr. James Baker Williams, Forton Old
Hall; Mr. Henderson, High Gable; Rev. Joshua Stone, Nether Walsling.

"This is a very obvious way of limiting our field of operations," said
Holmes.  "No doubt Baynes, with his methodical mind, has already
adopted some similar plan."

"I don't quite understand."

"Well, my dear fellow, we have already arrived at the conclusion that
the message received by Garcia at dinner was an appointment or an
assignation.  Now, if the obvious reading of it is correct, and in
order to keep the tryst one has to ascend a main stair and seek the
seventh door in a corridor, it is perfectly clear that the house is a
very large one.  It is equally certain that this house cannot be more
than a mile or two from Oxshott, since Garcia was walking in that
direction and hoped, according to my reading of the facts, to be back
in Wisteria Lodge in time to avail himself of an alibi, which would
only be valid up to one o'clock.  As the number of large houses close
to Oxshott must be limited, I adopted the obvious method of sending to
the agents mentioned by Scott Eccles and obtaining a list of them.
Here they are in this telegram, and the other end of our tangled skein
must lie among them."

        *           *           *

It was nearly six o'clock before we found ourselves in the pretty
Surrey village of Esher, with Inspector Baynes as our companion.

Holmes and I had taken things for the night, and found comfortable
quarters at the Bull.  Finally we set out in the company of the
detective on our visit to Wisteria Lodge.  It was a cold, dark March
evening, with a sharp wind and a fine rain beating upon our faces, a
fit setting for the wild common over which our road passed and the
tragic goal to which it led us.




2.  The Tiger of San Pedro


A cold and melancholy walk of a couple of miles brought us to a high
wooden gate, which opened into a gloomy avenue of chestnuts. The curved
and shadowed drive led us to a low, dark house, pitch-black against a
slate-coloured sky. From the front window upon the left of the door
there peeped a glimmer of a feeble light.

"There's a constable in possession," said Baynes.  "I'll knock at the
window."  He stepped across the grass plot and tapped with his hand on
the pane.  Through the fogged glass I dimly saw a man spring up from a
chair beside the fire, and heard a sharp cry from within the room.  An
instant later a white-faced, hard-breathing policeman had opened the
door, the candle wavering in his trembling hand.

"What's the matter, Walters?" asked Baynes sharply.

The man mopped his forehead with his handkerchief and gave a long sigh
of relief.

"I am glad you have come, sir.  It has been a long evening, and I don't
think my nerve is as good as it was."

"Your nerve, Walters?  I should not have thought you had a nerve in
your body."

"Well, sir, it's this lonely, silent house and the queer thing in the
kitchen.  Then when you tapped at the window I thought it had come
again."

"That what had come again?"

"The devil, sir, for all I know.  It was at the window."

"What was at the window, and when?"

"It was just about two hours ago.  The light was just fading.  I was
sitting reading in the chair.  I don't know what made me look up, but
there was a face looking in at me through the lower pane. Lord, sir,
what a face it was!  I'll see it in my dreams."

"Tut, tut, Walters.  This is not talk for a police-constable."

"I know, sir, I know; but it shook me, sir, and there's no use to deny
it.  It wasn't black, sir, nor was it white, nor any colour that I know
but a kind of queer shade like clay with a splash of milk in it.  Then
there was the size of it--it was twice yours, sir.  And the look of
it--the great staring goggle eyes, and the line of white teeth like a
hungry beast.  I tell you, sir, I couldn't move a finger, nor get my
breath, till it whisked away and was gone.  Out I ran and through the
shrubbery, but thank God there was no one there."

"If I didn't know you were a good man, Walters, I should put a black
mark against you for this.  If it were the devil himself a constable on
duty should never thank God that he could not lay his hands upon him.
I suppose the whole thing is not a vision and a touch of nerves?"

"That, at least, is very easily settled," said Holmes, lighting his
little pocket lantern.  "Yes," he reported, after a short examination
of the grass bed, "a number twelve shoe, I should say.  If he was all
on the same scale as his foot he must certainly have been a giant."

"What became of him?"

"He seems to have broken through the shrubbery and made for the road."

"Well," said the inspector with a grave and thoughtful face, "whoever
he may have been, and whatever he may have wanted, he's gone for the
present, and we have more immediate things to attend to.  Now, Mr.
Holmes, with your permission, I will show you round the house."

The various bedrooms and sitting-rooms had yielded nothing to a careful
search.  Apparently the tenants had brought little or nothing with
them, and all the furniture down to the smallest details had been taken
over with the house.  A good deal of clothing with the stamp of Marx
and Co., High Holborn, had been left behind.  Telegraphic inquiries had
been already made which showed that Marx knew nothing of his customer
save that he was a good payer.  Odds and ends, some pipes, a few
novels, two of them in Spanish, an old-fashioned pinfire revolver, and
a guitar were among the personal property.

"Nothing in all this," said Baynes, stalking, candle in hand, from room
to room.  "But now, Mr. Holmes, I invite your attention to the kitchen."

It was a gloomy, high-ceilinged room at the back of the house, with a
straw litter in one corner, which served apparently as a bed for the
cook.  The table was piled with half-eaten dishes and dirty plates, the
debris of last night's dinner.

"Look at this," said Baynes.  "What do you make of it?"

He held up his candle before an extraordinary object which stood at the
back of the dresser.  It was so wrinkled and shrunken and withered that
it was difficult to say what it might have been. One could but say that
it was black and leathery and that it bore some resemblance to a
dwarfish, human figure.  At first, as I examined it, I thought that it
was a mummified negro baby, and then it seemed a very twisted and
ancient monkey.  Finally I was left in doubt as to whether it was
animal or human.  A double band of white shells were strung round the
centre of it.

"Very interesting--very interesting, indeed!" said Holmes, peering at
this sinister relic.  "Anything more?"

In silence Baynes led the way to the sink and held forward his candle.
The limbs and body of some large, white bird, torn savagely to pieces
with the feathers still on, were littered all over it.  Holmes pointed
to the wattles on the severed head.

"A white cock," said he.  "Most interesting!  It is really a very
curious case."

But Mr. Baynes had kept his most sinister exhibit to the last. From
under the sink he drew a zinc pail which contained a quantity of blood.
Then from the table he took a platter heaped with small pieces of
charred bone.

"Something has been killed and something has been burned.  We raked all
these out of the fire.  We had a doctor in this morning.  He says that
they are not human."

Holmes smiled and rubbed his hands.

"I must congratulate you, Inspector, on handling so distinctive and
instructive a case.  Your powers, if I may say so without offence, seem
superior to your opportunities."

Inspector Baynes's small eyes twinkled with pleasure.

"You're right, Mr. Holmes.  We stagnate in the provinces.  A case of
this sort gives a man a chance, and I hope that I shall take it.  What
do you make of these bones?"

"A lamb, I should say, or a kid."

"And the white cock?"

"Curious, Mr. Baynes, very curious.  I should say almost unique."

"Yes, sir, there must have been some very strange people with some very
strange ways in this house.  One of them is dead.  Did his companions
follow him and kill him?  If they did we should have them, for every
port is watched.  But my own views are different.  Yes, sir, my own
views are very different."

"You have a theory then?"

"And I'll work it myself, Mr. Holmes.  It's only due to my own credit
to do so.  Your name is made, but I have still to make mine.  I should
be glad to be able to say afterwards that I had solved it without your
help."

Holmes laughed good-humoredly.

"Well, well, Inspector," said he. "Do you follow your path and I will
follow mine.  My results are always very much at your service if you
care to apply to me for them.  I think that I have seen all that I wish
in this house, and that my time may be more profitably employed
elsewhere.  Au revoir and good luck!"

I could tell by numerous subtle signs, which might have been lost upon
anyone but myself, that Holmes was on a hot scent.  As impassive as
ever to the casual observer, there were none the less a subdued
eagerness and suggestion of tension in his brightened eyes and brisker
manner which assured me that the game was afoot.  After his habit he
said nothing, and after mine I asked no questions.  Sufficient for me
to share the sport and lend my humble help to the capture without
distracting that intent brain with needless interruption.  All would
come round to me in due time.

I waited, therefore--but to my ever-deepening disappointment I waited
in vain.  Day succeeded day, and my friend took no step forward.  One
morning he spent in town, and I learned from a casual reference that he
had visited the British Museum.  Save for this one excursion, he spent
his days in long and often solitary walks, or in chatting with a number
of village gossips whose acquaintance he had cultivated.

"I'm sure, Watson, a week in the country will be invaluable to you," he
remarked.  "It is very pleasant to see the first green shoots upon the
hedges and the catkins on the hazels once again. With a spud, a tin
box, and an elementary book on botany, there are instructive days to be
spent."  He prowled about with this equipment himself, but it was a
poor show of plants which he would bring back of an evening.

Occasionally in our rambles we came across Inspector Baynes.  His fat,
red face wreathed itself in smiles and his small eyes glittered as he
greeted my companion.  He said little about the case, but from that
little we gathered that he also was not dissatisfied at the course of
events.  I must admit, however, that I was somewhat surprised when,
some five days after the crime, I opened my morning paper to find in
large letters:

    THE OXSHOTT MYSTERY
    A SOLUTION
    ARREST OF SUPPOSED ASSASSIN

Holmes sprang in his chair as if he had been stung when I read the
headlines.

"By Jove!" he cried.  "You don't mean that Baynes has got him?"

"Apparently," said I as I read the following report:

"Great excitement was caused in Esher and the neighbouring district
when it was learned late last night that an arrest had been effected in
connection with the Oxshott murder.  It will be remembered that Mr.
Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge, was found dead on Oxshott Common, his body
showing signs of extreme violence, and that on the same night his
servant and his cook fled, which appeared to show their participation
in the crime.  It was suggested, but never proved, that the deceased
gentleman may have had valuables in the house, and that their
abstraction was the motive of the crime.  Every effort was made by
Inspector Baynes, who has the case in hand, to ascertain the hiding
place of the fugitives, and he had good reason to believe that they had
not gone far but were lurking in some retreat which had been already
prepared.  It was certain from the first, however, that they would
eventually be detected, as the cook, from the evidence of one or two
tradespeople who have caught a glimpse of him through the window, was a
man of most remarkable appearance--being a huge and hideous mulatto,
with yellowish features of a pronounced negroid type.  This man has
been seen since the crime, for he was detected and pursued by Constable
Walters on the same evening, when he had the audacity to revisit
Wisteria Lodge.  Inspector Baynes, considering that such a visit must
have some purpose in view and was likely, therefore, to be repeated,
abandoned the house but left an ambuscade in the shrubbery.  The man
walked into the trap and was captured last night after a struggle in
which Constable Downing was badly bitten by the savage.  We understand
that when the prisoner is brought before the magistrates a remand will be
applied for by the police, and that great developments are hoped from
his capture."

"Really we must see Baynes at once," cried Holmes, picking up his hat.
"We will just catch him before he starts."  We hurried down the village
street and found, as we had expected, that the inspector was just
leaving his lodgings.

"You've seen the paper, Mr. Holmes?" he asked, holding one out to us.

"Yes, Baynes, I've seen it.  Pray don't think it a liberty if I give
you a word of friendly warning."

"Of warning, Mr. Holmes?"

"I have looked into this case with some care, and I am not convinced
that you are on the right lines.  I don't want you to commit yourself
too far unless you are sure."

"You're very kind, Mr. Holmes."

"I assure you I speak for your good."

It seemed to me that something like a wink quivered for an instant over
one of Mr. Baynes's tiny eyes.

"We agreed to work on our own lines, Mr. Holmes.  That's what I am
doing."

"Oh, very good," said Holmes.  "Don't blame me."

"No, sir; I believe you mean well by me.  But we all have our own
systems, Mr. Holmes.  You have yours, and maybe I have mine."

"Let us say no more about it."

"You're welcome always to my news.  This fellow is a perfect savage, as
strong as a cart-horse and as fierce as the devil.  He chewed Downing's
thumb nearly off before they could master him. He hardly speaks a word
of English, and we can get nothing out of him but grunts."

"And you think you have evidence that he murdered his late master?"

"I didn't say so, Mr. Holmes; I didn't say so.  We all have our little
ways.  You try yours and I will try mine.  That's the agreement."

Holmes shrugged his shoulders as we walked away together.  "I can't
make the man out.  He seems to be riding for a fall.  Well, as he says,
we must each try our own way and see what comes of it.  But there's
something in Inspector Baynes which I can't quite understand."

"Just sit down in that chair, Watson," said Sherlock Holmes when we had
returned to our apartment at the Bull.  "I want to put you in touch
with the situation, as I may need your help to-night. Let me show you
the evolution of this case so far as I have been able to follow it.
Simple as it has been in its leading features, it has none the less
presented surprising difficulties in the way of an arrest.  There are
gaps in that direction which we have still to fill.

"We will go back to the note which was handed in to Garcia upon the
evening of his death.  We may put aside this idea of Baynes's that
Garcia's servants were concerned in the matter.  The proof of this lies
in the fact that it was _he_ who had arranged for the presence of Scott
Eccles, which could only have been done for the purpose of an alibi.
It was Garcia, then, who had an enterprise, and apparently a criminal
enterprise, in hand that night in the course of which he met his death.
I say 'criminal' because only a man with a criminal enterprise desires
to establish an alibi. Who, then, is most likely to have taken his
life?  Surely the person against whom the criminal enterprise was
directed.  So far it seems to me that we are on safe ground.

"We can now see a reason for the disappearance of Garcia's household.
They were _all_ confederates in the same unknown crime. If it came off
when Garcia returned, any possible suspicion would be warded off by the
Englishman's evidence, and all would be well.  But the attempt was a
dangerous one, and if Garcia did _not_ return by a certain hour it was
probable that his own life had been sacrificed.  It had been arranged,
therefore, that in such a case his two subordinates were to make for
some prearranged spot where they could escape investigation and be in a
position afterwards to renew their attempt.  That would fully explain
the facts, would it not?"

The whole inexplicable tangle seemed to straighten out before me. I
wondered, as I always did, how it had not been obvious to me before.

"But why should one servant return?"

"We can imagine that in the confusion of flight something precious,
something which he could not bear to part with, had been left behind.
That would explain his persistence, would it not?"

"Well, what is the next step?"

"The next step is the note received by Garcia at the dinner.  It
indicates a confederate at the other end.  Now, where was the other
end?  I have already shown you that it could only lie in some large
house, and that the number of large houses is limited. My first days in
this village were devoted to a series of walks in which in the
intervals of my botanical researches I made a reconnaissance of all the
large houses and an examination of the family history of the occupants.
One house, and only one, riveted my attention.  It is the famous old
Jacobean grange of High Gable, one mile on the farther side of Oxshott,
and less than half a mile from the scene of the tragedy.  The other
mansions belonged to prosaic and respectable people who live far aloof
from romance.  But Mr. Henderson, of High Gable, was by all accounts a
curious man to whom curious adventures might befall. I concentrated my
attention, therefore, upon him and his household.

"A singular set of people, Watson--the man himself the most singular of
them all.  I managed to see him on a plausible pretext, but I seemed to
read in his dark, deepset, brooding eyes that he was perfectly aware of
my true business.  He is a man of fifty, strong, active, with iron-gray
hair, great bunched black eyebrows, the step of a deer and the air of
an emperor--a fierce, masterful man, with a red-hot spirit behind his
parchment face. He is either a foreigner or has lived long in the
tropics, for he is yellow and sapless, but tough as whipcord.  His
friend and secretary, Mr. Lucas, is undoubtedly a foreigner, chocolate
brown, wily, suave, and catlike, with a poisonous gentleness of speech.
You see, Watson, we have come already upon two sets of foreigners--one
at Wisteria Lodge and one at High Gable--so our gaps are beginning to
close.

"These two men, close and confidential friends, are the centre of the
household; but there is one other person who for our immediate purpose
may be even more important.  Henderson has two children--girls of
eleven and thirteen.  Their governess is a Miss Burnet, an Englishwoman
of forty or thereabouts.  There is also one confidential manservant.
This little group forms the real family, for they travel about
together, and Henderson is a great traveller, always on the move.  It
is only within the last weeks that he has returned, after a year's
absence, to High Gable.  I may add that he is enormously rich, and
whatever his whims may be he can very easily satisfy them.  For the
rest, his house is full of butlers, footmen, maidservants, and the
usual overfed, underworked staff of a large English country house.

"So much I learned partly from village gossip and partly from my own
observation.  There are no better instruments than discharged servants
with a grievance, and I was lucky enough to find one.  I call it luck,
but it would not have come my way had I not been looking out for it.
As Baynes remarks, we all have our systems. It was my system which
enabled me to find John Warner, late gardener of High Gable, sacked in
a moment of temper by his imperious employer.  He in turn had friends
among the indoor servants who unite in their fear and dislike of their
master.  So I had my key to the secrets of the establishment.

"Curious people, Watson!  I don't pretend to understand it all yet, but
very curious people anyway.  It's a double-winged house, and the
servants live on one side, the family on the other. There's no link
between the two save for Henderson's own servant, who serves the
family's meals.  Everything is carried to a certain door, which forms
the one connection.  Governess and children hardly go out at all,
except into the garden.  Henderson never by any chance walks alone.
His dark secretary is like his shadow.  The gossip among the servants
is that their master is terribly afraid of something.  'Sold his soul
to the devil in exchange for money,' says Warner, 'and expects his
creditor to come up and claim his own.'  Where they came from, or who
they are, nobody has an idea.  They are very violent.  Twice Henderson
has lashed at folk with his dog-whip, and only his long purse and heavy
compensation have kept him out of the courts.

"Well, now, Watson, let us judge the situation by this new information.
We may take it that the letter came out of this strange household and
was an invitation to Garcia to carry out some attempt which had already
been planned. Who wrote the note? It was someone within the citadel,
and it was a woman.  Who then but Miss Burnet, the governess?  All our
reasoning seems to point that way.  At any rate, we may take it as a
hypothesis and see what consequences it would entail.  I may add that
Miss Burnet's age and character make it certain that my first idea that
there might be a love interest in our story is out of the question.

"If she wrote the note she was presumably the friend and confederate of
Garcia.  What, then, might she be expected to do if she heard of his
death?  If he met it in some nefarious enterprise her lips might be
sealed.  Still, in her heart, she must retain bitterness and hatred
against those who had killed him and would presumably help so far as
she could to have revenge upon them.  Could we see her, then and try to
use her?  That was my first thought.  But now we come to a sinister
fact.  Miss Burnet has not been seen by any human eye since the night
of the murder.  From that evening she has utterly vanished.  Is she
alive?  Has she perhaps met her end on the same night as the friend
whom she had summoned?  Or is she merely a prisoner? There is the point
which we still have to decide.

"You will appreciate the difficulty of the situation, Watson. There is
nothing upon which we can apply for a warrant.  Our whole scheme might
seem fantastic if laid before a magistrate. The woman's disappearance
counts for nothing, since in that extraordinary household any member of
it might be invisible for a week.  And yet she may at the present
moment be in danger of her life.  All I can do is to watch the house
and leave my agent, Warner, on guard at the gates.  We can't let such a
situation continue.  If the law can do nothing we must take the risk
ourselves."

"What do you suggest?"

"I know which is her room.  It is accessible from the top of an
outhouse.  My suggestion is that you and I go to-night and see if we
can strike at the very heart of the mystery."

It was not, I must confess, a very alluring prospect.  The old house
with its atmosphere of murder, the singular and formidable inhabitants,
the unknown dangers of the approach, and the fact that we were putting
ourselves legally in a false position all combined to damp my ardour.
But there was something in the ice-cold reasoning of Holmes which made
it impossible to shrink from any adventure which he might recommend.
One knew that thus, and only thus, could a solution be found.  I
clasped his hand in silence, and the die was cast.

But it was not destined that our investigation should have so
adventurous an ending.  It was about five o'clock, and the shadows of
the March evening were beginning to fall, when an excited rustic rushed
into our room.

"They've gone, Mr. Holmes.  They went by the last train.  The lady
broke away, and I've got her in a cab downstairs."

"Excellent, Warner!" cried Holmes, springing to his feet. "Watson, the
gaps are closing rapidly."

In the cab was a woman, half-collapsed from nervous exhaustion. She
bore upon her aquiline and emaciated face the traces of some recent
tragedy.  Her head hung listlessly upon her breast, but as she raised
it and turned her dull eyes upon us I saw that her pupils were dark
dots in the centre of the broad gray iris.  She was drugged with opium.

"I watched at the gate, same as you advised, Mr. Holmes," said our
emissary, the discharged gardener.  "When the carriage came out I
followed it to the station.  She was like one walking in her sleep, but
when they tried to get her into the train she came to life and
struggled.  They pushed her into the carriage.  She fought her way out
again.  I took her part, got her into a cab, and here we are.  I shan't
forget the face at the carriage window as I led her away. I'd have a
short life if he had his way--the black-eyed, scowling, yellow devil."

We carried her upstairs, laid her on the sofa, and a couple of cups of
the strongest coffee soon cleared her brain from the mists of the drug.
Baynes had been summoned by Holmes, and the situation rapidly explained
to him.

"Why, sir, you've got me the very evidence I want," said the inspector
warmly, shaking my friend by the hand.  "I was on the same scent as you
from the first."

"What!  You were after Henderson?"

"Why, Mr. Holmes, when you were crawling in the shrubbery at High Gable
I was up one of the trees in the plantation and saw you down below.  It
was just who would get his evidence first."

"Then why did you arrest the mulatto?"

Baynes chuckled.

"I was sure Henderson, as he calls himself, felt that he was suspected,
and that he would lie low and make no move so long as he thought he was
in any danger.  I arrested the wrong man to make him believe that our
eyes were off him.  I knew he would be likely to clear off then and
give us a chance of getting at Miss Burnet."

Holmes laid his hand upon the inspector's shoulder.

"You will rise high in your profession.  You have instinct and
intuition," said he.

Baynes flushed with pleasure.

"I've had a plain-clothes man waiting at the station all the week.
Wherever the High Gable folk go he will keep them in sight.  But he
must have been hard put to it when Miss Burnet broke away.  However,
your man picked her up, and it all ends well.  We can't arrest without
her evidence, that is clear, so the sooner we get a statement the
better."

"Every minute she gets stronger," said Holmes, glancing at the
governess.  "But tell me, Baynes, who is this man Henderson?"

"Henderson," the inspector answered, "is Don Murillo, once called the
Tiger of San Pedro."

The Tiger of San Pedro!  The whole history of the man came back to me
in a flash.  He had made his name as the most lewd and bloodthirsty
tyrant that had ever governed any country with a pretence to
civilization.  Strong, fearless, and energetic, he had sufficient
virtue to enable him to impose his odious vices upon a cowering people
for ten or twelve years.  His name was a terror through all Central
America.  At the end of that time there was a universal rising against
him.  But he was as cunning as he was cruel, and at the first whisper
of coming trouble he had secretly conveyed his treasures aboard a ship
which was manned by devoted adherents.  It was an empty palace which
was stormed by the insurgents next day.  The dictator, his two
children, his secretary, and his wealth had all escaped them. From that
moment he had vanished from the world, and his identity had been a
frequent subject for comment in the European press.

"Yes, sir, Don Murillo, the Tiger of San Pedro," said Baynes. "If you
look it up you will find that the San Pedro colours are green and
white, same as in the note, Mr. Holmes.  Henderson he called himself,
but I traced him back, Paris and Rome and Madrid to Barcelona, where
his ship came in in '86.  They've been looking for him all the time for
their revenge, but it is only now that they have begun to find him out."

"They discovered him a year ago," said Miss Burnet, who had sat up and
was now intently following the conversation.  "Once already his life
has been attempted, but some evil spirit shielded him.  Now, again, it
is the noble, chivalrous Garcia who has fallen, while the monster goes
safe.  But another will come, and yet another, until some day justice
will be done; that is as certain as the rise of to-morrow's sun."  Her
thin hands clenched, and her worn face blanched with the passion of her
hatred.

"But how come you into this matter, Miss Burnet?" asked Holmes. "How
can an English lady join in such a murderous affair?"

"I join in it because there is no other way in the world by which
justice can be gained.  What does the law of England care for the
rivers of blood shed years ago in San Pedro, or for the shipload of
treasure which this man has stolen?  To you they are like crimes
committed in some other planet.  But _we_ know.  We have learned the
truth in sorrow and in suffering.  To us there is no fiend in hell like
Juan Murillo, and no peace in life while his victims still cry for
vengeance."

"No doubt," said Holmes, "he was as you say. I have heard that he was
atrocious.  But how are you affected?"

"I will tell you it all. This villain's policy was to murder, on one
pretext or another, every man who showed such promise that he might in
time come to be a dangerous rival.  My husband--yes, my real name is
Signora Victor Durando--was the San Pedro minister in London.  He met
me and married me there.  A nobler man never lived upon earth.
Unhappily, Murillo heard of his excellence, recalled him on some
pretext, and had him shot.  With a premonition of his fate he had
refused to take me with him.  His estates were confiscated, and I was
left with a pittance and a broken heart.

"Then came the downfall of the tyrant.  He escaped as you have just
described.  But the many whose lives he had ruined, whose nearest and
dearest had suffered torture and death at his hands, would not let the
matter rest.  They banded themselves into a society which should never
be dissolved until the work was done. It was my part after we had
discovered in the transformed Henderson the fallen despot, to attach
myself to his household and keep the others in touch with his
movements.  This I was able to do by securing the position of governess
in his family.  He little knew that the woman who faced him at every
meal was the woman whose husband he had hurried at an hour's notice
into eternity.  I smiled on him, did my duty to his children, and bided
my time.  An attempt was made in Paris and failed.  We zig-zagged
swiftly here and there over Europe to throw off the pursuers and
finally returned to this house, which he had taken upon his first
arrival in England.

"But here also the ministers of justice were waiting.  Knowing that he
would return there, Garcia, who is the son of the former highest
dignitary in San Pedro, was waiting with two trusty companions of
humble station, all three fired with the same reasons for revenge. He
could do little during the day, for Murillo took every precaution and
never went out save with his satellite Lucas, or Lopez as he was known
in the days of his greatness.  At night, however, he slept alone, and
the avenger might find him.  On a certain evening, which had been
prearranged, I sent my friend final instructions, for the man was
forever on the alert and continually changed his room.  I was to see
that the doors were open and the signal of a green or white light in a
window which faced the drive was to give notice if all was safe or if
the attempt had better be postponed.

"But everything went wrong with us.  In some way I had excited the
suspicion of Lopez, the secretary.  He crept up behind me and sprang
upon me just as I had finished the note.  He and his master dragged me
to my room and held judgment upon me as a convicted traitress.  Then
and there they would have plunged their knives into me could they have
seen how to escape the consequences of the deed.  Finally, after much
debate, they concluded that my murder was too dangerous.  But they
determined to get rid forever of Garcia.  They had gagged me, and
Murillo twisted my arm round until I gave him the address.  I swear
that he might have twisted it off had I understood what it would mean
to Garcia.  Lopez addressed the note which I had written, sealed it
with his sleeve-link, and sent it by the hand of the servant, Jose.
How they murdered him I do not know, save that it was Murillo's hand
who struck him down, for Lopez had remained to guard me.  I believe he
must have waited among the gorse bushes through which the path winds
and struck him down as he passed. At first they were of a mind to let
him enter the house and to kill him as a detected burglar; but they
argued that if they were mixed up in an inquiry their own identity
would at once be publicly disclosed and they would be open to further
attacks. With the death of Garcia, the pursuit might cease, since such
a death might frighten others from the task.

"All would now have been well for them had it not been for my knowledge
of what they had done.  I have no doubt that there were times when my
life hung in the balance.  I was confined to my room, terrorized by the
most horrible threats, cruelly ill-used to break my spirit--see this
stab on my shoulder and the bruises from end to end of my arms--and a
gag was thrust into my mouth on the one occasion when I tried to call
from the window.  For five days this cruel imprisonment continued, with
hardly enough food to hold body and soul together.  This afternoon a
good lunch was brought me, but the moment after I took it I knew that I
had been drugged.  In a sort of dream I remember being half-led,
half-carried to the carriage; in the same state I was conveyed to the
train.  Only then, when the wheels were almost moving, did I suddenly
realize that my liberty lay in my own hands.  I sprang out, they tried
to drag me back, and had it not been for the help of this good man, who
led me to the cab, I should never had broken away.  Now, thank God, I
am beyond their power forever."

We had all listened intently to this remarkable statement.  It was
Holmes who broke the silence.

"Our difficulties are not over," he remarked, shaking his head. "Our
police work ends, but our legal work begins."

"Exactly," said I.  "A plausible lawyer could make it out as an act of
self-defence.  There may be a hundred crimes in the background, but it
is only on this one that they can be tried."

"Come, come," said Baynes cheerily, "I think better of the law than
that.  Self-defence is one thing.  To entice a man in cold blood with
the object of murdering him is another, whatever danger you may fear
from him.  No, no, we shall all be justified when we see the tenants of
High Gable at the next Guildford Assizes."

        *           *           *

It is a matter of history, however, that a little time was still to
elapse before the Tiger of San Pedro should meet with his deserts.
Wily and bold, he and his companion threw their pursuer off their track
by entering a lodging-house in Edmonton Street and leaving by the
back-gate into Curzon Square.  From that day they were seen no more in
England.  Some six months afterwards the Marquess of Montalva and
Signor Rulli, his secretary, were both murdered in their rooms at the
Hotel Escurial at Madrid. The crime was ascribed to Nihilism, and the
murderers were never arrested.  Inspector Baynes visited us at Baker
Street with a printed description of the dark face of the secretary,
and of the masterful features, the magnetic black eyes, and the tufted
brows of his master.  We could not doubt that justice, if belated, had
come at last.

"A chaotic case, my dear Watson," said Holmes over an evening pipe. "It
will not be possible for you to present in that compact form which is
dear to your heart.  It covers two continents, concerns two groups of
mysterious persons, and is further complicated by the highly
respectable presence of our friend, Scott Eccles, whose inclusion shows
me that the deceased Garcia had a scheming mind and a well-developed
instinct of self-preservation.  It is remarkable only for the fact that
amid a perfect jungle of possibilities we, with our worthy
collaborator, the inspector, have kept our close hold on the essentials
and so been guided along the crooked and winding path.  Is there any
point which is not quite clear to you?"

"The object of the mulatto cook's return?"

"I think that the strange creature in the kitchen may account for it.
The man was a primitive savage from the backwoods of San Pedro, and
this was his fetish.  When his companion and he had fled to some
prearranged retreat--already occupied, no doubt by a confederate--the
companion had persuaded him to leave so compromising an article of
furniture.  But the mulatto's heart was with it, and he was driven back
to it next day, when, on reconnoitering through the window, he found
policeman Walters in possession.  He waited three days longer, and then
his piety or his superstition drove him to try once more.  Inspector
Baynes, who, with his usual astuteness, had minimized the incident
before me, had really recognized its importance and had left a trap
into which the creature walked.  Any other point, Watson?"

"The torn bird, the pail of blood, the charred bones, all the mystery
of that weird kitchen?"

Holmes smiled as he turned up an entry in his note-book.

"I spent a morning in the British Museum reading up on that and other
points.  Here is a quotation from Eckermann's Voodooism and the Negroid
Religions:

"'The true voodoo-worshipper attempts nothing of importance without
certain sacrifices which are intended to propitiate his unclean gods.
In extreme cases these rites take the form of human sacrifices followed
by cannibalism.  The more usual victims are a white cock, which is
plucked in pieces alive, or a black goat, whose throat is cut and body
burned.'

"So you see our savage friend was very orthodox in his ritual. It is
grotesque, Watson," Holmes added, as he slowly fastened his notebook,
"but, as I have had occasion to remark, there is but one step from the
grotesque to the horrible."









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge, by 
Arthur Conan Doyle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURE OF WISTERIA LODGE ***

***** This file should be named 2343.txt or 2343.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/2343/

Produced by David Brannan

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
