# Assignment 2 for SJTU EE208
> 521030910013 Shixiang Song

This assignment contains four parts: the sorce code, the assignment report, the automatically generated results ,and the ```REAMDME``` document.

## The source code
The source code of this assignemnt is by Python. To run the assignemnt successfully, you have to install ```BeautifulSoup``` and ```lxml``` advancedly.

## The report
The report of this assignemnt is written by LaTeX. To make the document lighter, we only provide PDF version.

The source code  `exercise1.py` is for exercise 1, and the source code `exercise1_bonus.py` is for exercise 1(bonus). The `crawler_sample.py` is for exercise 2 and 3. The `crawler_sample.py` is for exercise 4.

<font color = red><strong>
**NOTICE:``crawler.py`` cannot run idividually. To run the code, the following three methods are both available!**
</strong></font>

Method 1:
```
python crawler.py https://www.sjtu.edu.cn bfs 10
```
Method 2
```
python
>>> from crawler import *
>>> crawl("https://www.sjtu.edu.cn", "bfs", 10)
```
**Additianal NOTICE:** Method 2 may create some unnecessary outputs, since the Python IDLE interpreter will also print the return value.

Method 3

Run `sjtu_crawler.py`

## The results
The result of this program should be printed in the terminal. Theoretically, there should not be any result files. However, there is some document generated automatically。

The ```auto_result``` is automatically generated by Python program. For the convience, we just remove it into a new folder. If you run the program of the exercise 4, it will come out again.
The file framework is as follows:

    -- REAMDME.md
    -- report.pdf
    -- code
        -- example1.py
        -- example1_bonus.py
        -- crawler.py
        -- crawler_sample.py
        -- index.txt
    -- auto_result
        -- index.txt
        -- html
        -- __pycache__

